---
layout: post
title: HuxBox - a box for the space's Rep Rap Huxley 3D printer
permalink: projects/huxbox/
excerpt: I designed and made an acrylic box to hold our Rep Rap Pro Huxley 3d printer.
thumbnail: /files/projects/huxbox/thumbnail.jpg
author: angusgr
---

*angusgr — Sun, 05/08/2012 - 10:53pm*

I designed and made an acrylic box to hold our Rep Rap Pro Huxley 3d
printer.

[![](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox1.jpg)](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox1.jpg)

[![Huxbox rear view](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox3.jpg)](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox3.jpg)

Why Box In a Printer?
---------------------

The main reason was to ensure stable and warm temps, for tidy prints.
Being a large warehouse-like space, MHV is prone to cold draughts during
winter. In fact, some winter days the heated printer bed was having
trouble getting up to temperature at all due to heat lost in the
surrounding air!

Draughts also seem to effect the clean deposition of layers. I didn't do
a complete test, but here are two prints I did on consecutive Saturdays:

[![Photo of test prints with and without box](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox12.jpg)](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox12.jpg)

Neither print is what I'd call a "success." However, the left hand print
was done in open air, and the edge on it is much more ragged than the
right hand print, which was done in the cardboard box prototype.

Also, dust is an enemy of printer extruders. MHV is a dusty space.

MAJOR EDIT OCTOBER 2012
-----------------------

So, the box may not be a net gain for the printer. In the dead of winter
it certainly seemed to help. However, now that temperatures are much
warmer it seems like boxing the printer in has some negative effects -
layers stay warm and soft longer, so the printer is more prone to
"smoosh" them around when the next layer is laid down. Leading to uneven
prints. You can mitigate this by using the Cool plugin in Skeinforge (or
Slow Down in Slic3r) to make sure each layer takes a minimum time.
However for now - in temperate weather - we've just removed the box
altogether. In fact we've been experimenting with active cooling,
sending a smooth and even flow of air over the entire print gives
noticably good results as well. More experimentation with different
object sizes & styles would give us more information, especially once
winter comes back and the workshop cools down again!

 

Design
------

I wanted a design that matched the printer's form closely, not a square
box.

I started out with some ideas about 3D printing angled brackets and
drilling holes in the acrylic to hold them together. However, after lots
of consultation with other MHV members I was convinced that the way to
work with acrylic was to "weld" it together with chemical acrylic
welder.

So I came up with this design. Lots of high school trigonometry to get
the angles right! 

![HuxBox design](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox-design.png)

You can [download the original SVG vector file on thingiverse](//www.thingiverse.com/thing:27980).

The sections, from left to right, are: Rear panel, front door, outlined
front panel (door closes against this, provides rigidity for box), left
side panel, right side panel.

There is a slot on the left side panel, leading from the base up to the
filament feedthrough. This allows you to lift the whole box off the
printer, without disturbing the filament. Lifting the box off is very
useful for changing flament or performing maintenance, but in day to day
operation you can just open the front door and reach in.

The other cutout recess on the left side is for the power and USB cables
to get out.

Prototype
---------

What's a cheap and plentiful prototyping material? Cardboard! This
prototype was to test the fundamental idea, and to ensure the design
cleared the printer on all sides:

[![Cardboard prototype](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox11.jpg)](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox11.jpg)

Limited visibility meant leaving a hole in the cardboard front rather
than a hinged door, though. Draughty!

[![Draughty cardbord box](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox10.jpg)](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox10.jpg)

Still, the printer warmed up faster and print quality seemed better.
Time to make a more fireproof, less opaque, version!

Building
--------

The design was CNC cut in 6mm clear acrylic by a local plastics
shop, [Plastic Creations](//www.plasticcreations.com.au/). 6mm
acrylic is probably overkill, but I shared a sheet of acrylic with
someone who was building an aquarium and needed the extra thickness.

I collected the sheets, covered in protective paper, from Plastic
Creations along with a needle-tipped dispenser full of Weld-On thin
acrylic welding solvent.

**Important: Weld-On is easy to use and makes really powerful joins, but
it's a very nasty chemical. If you're using it, read the safety
information and take every precaution!**

Putting the box together was a case of making a simple jig to put two
pieces together, then using the needle dispenser to run Weld-On along
the inside edge of the joint. Capillary action pulls the weldon into the
joint itself.

After 10 minutes or so the welded joint was solid enough to move on to
the next side:

[![Huxbox construction](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox6.jpg)](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox6.jpg)

[![Huxbox construction 3](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox7.jpg)](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox7.jpg)

[![Huxbox construction 3](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox8.jpg)](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox8.jpg)

Thanks to Werner for his expertise in simple jig construction, and Kim
for her general assembly assistance.

I found CNC cut acrylic to be exceptionally easy to work with as a
beginner! Safety concerns aside, the Weld-On solvent is near-magical!

Attaching the door was the last part. I did this a day later, so the
other joints had time to cure.

I'd picked up some clear acrylic piano hinges from Plastic Creations.
First I chemically welded them to the side of the box, then taped &
clamped the door in place and welded them to the door:

[![Huxbox door attachment](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox9.jpg)](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox9.jpg)

I wouldn't do it this way again:

-   Piano hinges are longer and thinner than necessary, and because
    they're long even a small amount of flex due to the door weight
    causes them to sag and foul the hinge barrel at the bottom. I     should
    have found some alternative hinges. The only thing you need to make
    sure of is that the hinge flanges are wide enough to reach around
    the door on the side, past the 6mm edge of the door to the box
    behind it (an "over the edge" hinge setup.)
-   I should have welded them to the door first with the door sitting
    flat, then attached the door to the frame.

As a result of my poor choices, the door hinges were very creaky and
stiff until Jess noticed some parts of the flange were fouling as they
turned. A delicate application of the dremel cleaned them up, but it
would have been better to have avoided the whole fiasco!

If I did this over again, I would consider CNC drilling mounting holes
and then screwing metal hinges into the door & side panel.


Results
-------

Box looks good, printer prints well and has been serving MHV nicely
through a somewhat chilly & draughty winter!

My initial trepidation with acrylic is long gone, I can't wait for
another excuse to build with it!

[![3D printer fans](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox4.jpg)](/files/projects/huxbox/huxbox4.jpg)
